README.md, before:

packer-FreeBSD
==============

This repository contains the necessary tools to build a Vagrant-ready
FreeBSD virtual machine using Packer.

There are [official FreeBSD] VMs available from the Vagrant Cloud.

Prerequisites
--------------

- [Packer]

- [Vagrant]

- [VirtualBox] or [VMWare Fusion]

Instructions
------------

To create a box:

1.  Clone this repository:

        $ git clone https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD.git
        $ cd packer-FreeBSD

2.  Build the box:

        $ packer build .

3.  Add it to the list of Vagrant boxes.  See
    [Handling `.iso` and `.box` files](#handling-iso-and-box-files) for
    more information.

        $ vagrant box add builds/FreeBSD-13.2-RELEASE-amd64.box --name FreeBSD-13.2-RELEASE-amd64

Sample `Vagrantbox` file
------------------------

```ruby
servers = [
  { name: 'www.local', cpus: 2, memory: 1024 },
  { name: 'db.local', cpus: 1, memory: 2048 }
]

script = <<-SCRIPT
  sed -i '' "s/Vagrant/$(hostname -s)/g" /usr/local/etc/mDNSResponderServices.conf
  service mdnsresponderposix restart
SCRIPT

ansible_raw_arguments = []

Vagrant.configure(2) do |config|
  servers.each do |server|
    config.vm.define server[:name] do |box|
      box.vm.box      = 'FreeBSD-13.2-RELEASE-amd64'
      box.vm.hostname = server[:name]
      box.vm.provider 'virtualbox' do |v|
        v.default_nic_type       = 'virtio'
        v.linked_clone           = true
        v.name, v.cpus, v.memory = server.values_at(:name, :cpus, :memory)
      end

      if server == servers.last
        box.vm.provision 'ansible' do |ansible|
          ansible.compatibility_mode = '2.0'
          ansible.limit              = 'all'
          ansible.playbook           = 'site.yml'
          ansible.inventory_path     = 'local'
          ansible.raw_arguments      = ansible_raw_arguments
        end
      else
        ansible_raw_arguments << private_key_path(server[:name])
      end
    end
  end

  config.vm.provision 'shell', inline: script
end

def private_key_path(server_name)
  provider = ENV['VAGRANT_DEFAULT_PROVIDER'] || 'virtualbox'
  vagrant_dotfile_path = ENV['VAGRANT_DOTFILE_PATH'] || '.vagrant'

  "--private-key=#{vagrant_dotfile_path}/machines/#{server_name}/" \
    "#{provider}/private_key"
end
```

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Build Options

Below is a sample `variables.pkrvars.hcl` file:

```hcl
arch          = "amd64"
branch        = "-RELEASE"
build_date    = ""
cpus          = 1
directory     = "releases"
disk_size     = 10240
filesystem    = "zfs"
git_commit    = ""
guest_os_type = "FreeBSD_64"
memory        = 1024
mirror        = "https://download.freebsd.org"
rc_conf_file  = ""
revision      = "13.2"
```

The following variables can be set:

-   `cpus` is the number of CPUs assigned.  _Default:_ `1`

-   `disk_size` is the HDD size in megabytes.  _Default:_ `10240`

-   `memory` is the amount of RAM in megabytes assigned.  _Default:_
    `1024`

-   `revision` is the FreeBSD revision number.  _Default:_ `13.2`

-   `branch` used in conjunction with `build_date`, `git_commit` and
    `directory`.  _Default:_ `-RELEASE`

    See FreeBSD's [Release Branches] for more information.  Possible
    values are:

    | Branch                  | Directory   |
    | ------                  | ---------   |
    | `-CURRENT`              | `snapshots` |
    | `-STABLE`               | `snapshots` |
    | `-ALPHA1`, `-ALPHA2`, … | `snapshots` |
    | `-PRERELEASE`           | `snapshots` |
    | `-BETA1`, `-BETA2`, …   | `releases`  |
    | `-RC1`, `-RC2`, …       | `releases`  |
    | `-RELEASE`              | `releases`  |

-   `arch` is the target architecture (`i386` or `amd64`).  _Default:_
    `amd64`

-   `guest_os_type` (VirtualBox) used in conjunction with `arch`
    (`FreeBSD` or `FreeBSD_64`).  See [packer's
    documentation](https://www.packer.io/docs/builders/virtualbox-iso.html#guest_os_type).
    _Default:_ `FreeBSD_64`

-   `filesystem` is the file system type (`ufs` or `zfs`).  _Default:_
    `zfs`

-   `mirror` is the preferred FreeBSD mirror.  _Default:_
    `https://download.freebsd.org`

-   `rc_conf_file` is the file where `rc.conf` parameters are stored.
    _Default: empty_ .  Possible values are:

    | Value    | File                                          |
    | -----    | ----                                          |
    |          | `/etc/rc.conf`                                |
    | `local`  | `/etc/rc.conf.local` (Its use is discouraged) |
    | `vendor` | `/etc/defaults/vendor.conf`                   |
    | `name`   | `(/usr/local)/etc/rc.conf.d/<name>`           |

Create a `variables.pkrvars.hcl` file overriding the default
values, and invoke:

    $ packer build -var-file="variables.pkrvars.hcl" .

You can also select which components you wish to install.  By default,
it runs the following provisioning scripts:

| Name         | Description                                                               |
| ----         | -----------                                                               |
| [`update`]   | Updates to the latest patch level (if applicable) and the latest packages |
| [`vagrant`]  | Vagrant-related configuration                                             |
| [`zeroconf`] | Enables zero-configuration networking                                     |
| [`ansible`]  | Installs python and CA Root certificates                                  |
| [`vmtools`]  | Virtual Machine-specific utilities                                        |
| [`cleanup`]  | Cleanup script (must be called last)                                      |

The following scripts are also available:

| Name          | Description                      |
| ----          | -----------                      |
| [`hardening`] | Provides basic hardening options |
| [`ports`]     | Installs the FreeBSD ports tree  |

### Handling `.iso` and `.box` files

Packer will automatically download the `.iso` image if it does not find
the right one under the `iso` directory.  Optionally, you can download
the `.iso` image and save it to the `iso` directory.

`.box` files will be created under the `builds` directory.

[official FreeBSD]: https://app.vagrantup.com/freebsd
[Release Branches]: https://www.freebsd.org/doc/en/books/dev-model/release-branches.html
[Packer]: https://www.packer.io/docs/installation.html
[Vagrant]: https://www.vagrantup.com/downloads.html
[VirtualBox]: https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads
[VMWare Fusion]: http://www.vmware.com/products/fusion/
[`ansible`]: https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD/blob/main/scripts/ansible.sh
[`cleanup`]: https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD/blob/main/scripts/cleanup.sh
[`hardening`]: https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD/blob/main/scripts/hardening.sh
[`ports`]: https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD/blob/main/scripts/ports.sh
[`update`]: https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD/blob/main/scripts/update.sh
[`vagrant`]: https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD/blob/main/scripts/vagrant.sh
[`vmtools`]: https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD/blob/main/scripts/vmtools.sh
[`zeroconf`]: https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD/blob/main/scripts/zeroconf.sh

Commit message:

Make zstd conditional to allow for easier comparison

README.md, after:

packer-FreeBSD
==============

This repository contains the necessary tools to build a Vagrant-ready
FreeBSD virtual machine using Packer.

There are [official FreeBSD] VMs available from the Vagrant Cloud.

Prerequisites
--------------

- [Packer]

- [Vagrant]

- [VirtualBox] or [VMWare Fusion]

Instructions
------------

To create a box:

1.  Clone this repository:

        $ git clone https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD.git
        $ cd packer-FreeBSD

2.  Build the box:

        $ packer build .

3.  Add it to the list of Vagrant boxes.  See
    [Handling `.iso` and `.box` files](#handling-iso-and-box-files) for
    more information.

        $ vagrant box add builds/FreeBSD-13.2-RELEASE-amd64.box --name FreeBSD-13.2-RELEASE-amd64

Sample `Vagrantbox` file
------------------------

```ruby
servers = [
  { name: 'www.local', cpus: 2, memory: 1024 },
  { name: 'db.local', cpus: 1, memory: 2048 }
]

script = <<-SCRIPT
  sed -i '' "s/Vagrant/$(hostname -s)/g" /usr/local/etc/mDNSResponderServices.conf
  service mdnsresponderposix restart
SCRIPT

ansible_raw_arguments = []

Vagrant.configure(2) do |config|
  servers.each do |server|
    config.vm.define server[:name] do |box|
      box.vm.box      = 'FreeBSD-13.2-RELEASE-amd64'
      box.vm.hostname = server[:name]
      box.vm.provider 'virtualbox' do |v|
        v.default_nic_type       = 'virtio'
        v.linked_clone           = true
        v.name, v.cpus, v.memory = server.values_at(:name, :cpus, :memory)
      end

      if server == servers.last
        box.vm.provision 'ansible' do |ansible|
          ansible.compatibility_mode = '2.0'
          ansible.limit              = 'all'
          ansible.playbook           = 'site.yml'
          ansible.inventory_path     = 'local'
          ansible.raw_arguments      = ansible_raw_arguments
        end
      else
        ansible_raw_arguments << private_key_path(server[:name])
      end
    end
  end

  config.vm.provision 'shell', inline: script
end

def private_key_path(server_name)
  provider = ENV['VAGRANT_DEFAULT_PROVIDER'] || 'virtualbox'
  vagrant_dotfile_path = ENV['VAGRANT_DOTFILE_PATH'] || '.vagrant'

  "--private-key=#{vagrant_dotfile_path}/machines/#{server_name}/" \
    "#{provider}/private_key"
end
```

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Build Options

Below is a sample `variables.pkrvars.hcl` file:

```hcl
arch          = "amd64"
branch        = "-RELEASE"
build_date    = ""
cpus          = 1
directory     = "releases"
disk_size     = 10240
filesystem    = "zfs"
git_commit    = ""
guest_os_type = "FreeBSD_64"
memory        = 1024
mirror        = "https://download.freebsd.org"
rc_conf_file  = ""
revision      = "13.2"
```

The following variables can be set:

-   `cpus` is the number of CPUs assigned.  _Default:_ `1`

-   `disk_size` is the HDD size in megabytes.  _Default:_ `10240`

-   `memory` is the amount of RAM in megabytes assigned.  _Default:_
    `1024`

-   `revision` is the FreeBSD revision number.  _Default:_ `13.2`

-   `branch` used in conjunction with `build_date`, `git_commit` and
    `directory`.  _Default:_ `-RELEASE`

    See FreeBSD's [Release Branches] for more information.  Possible
    values are:

    | Branch                  | Directory   |
    | ------                  | ---------   |
    | `-CURRENT`              | `snapshots` |
    | `-STABLE`               | `snapshots` |
    | `-ALPHA1`, `-ALPHA2`, … | `snapshots` |
    | `-PRERELEASE`           | `snapshots` |
    | `-BETA1`, `-BETA2`, …   | `releases`  |
    | `-RC1`, `-RC2`, …       | `releases`  |
    | `-RELEASE`              | `releases`  |

-   `arch` is the target architecture (`i386` or `amd64`).  _Default:_
    `amd64`

-   `guest_os_type` (VirtualBox) used in conjunction with `arch`
    (`FreeBSD` or `FreeBSD_64`).  See [packer's
    documentation](https://www.packer.io/docs/builders/virtualbox-iso.html#guest_os_type).
    _Default:_ `FreeBSD_64`

-   `filesystem` is the file system type (`ufs` or `zfs`).  _Default:_
    `zfs`

-   `zfs_compression` is the compression algorithm (`zstd` or `lz4`).  _Default:_
    `zstd`

-   `mirror` is the preferred FreeBSD mirror.  _Default:_
    `https://download.freebsd.org`

-   `rc_conf_file` is the file where `rc.conf` parameters are stored.
    _Default: empty_ .  Possible values are:

    | Value    | File                                          |
    | -----    | ----                                          |
    |          | `/etc/rc.conf`                                |
    | `local`  | `/etc/rc.conf.local` (Its use is discouraged) |
    | `vendor` | `/etc/defaults/vendor.conf`                   |
    | `name`   | `(/usr/local)/etc/rc.conf.d/<name>`           |

Create a `variables.pkrvars.hcl` file overriding the default
values, and invoke:

    $ packer build -var-file="variables.pkrvars.hcl" .

You can also select which components you wish to install.  By default,
it runs the following provisioning scripts:

| Name         | Description                                                               |
| ----         | -----------                                                               |
| [`update`]   | Updates to the latest patch level (if applicable) and the latest packages |
| [`vagrant`]  | Vagrant-related configuration                                             |
| [`zeroconf`] | Enables zero-configuration networking                                     |
| [`ansible`]  | Installs python and CA Root certificates                                  |
| [`vmtools`]  | Virtual Machine-specific utilities                                        |
| [`cleanup`]  | Cleanup script (must be called last)                                      |

The following scripts are also available:

| Name          | Description                      |
| ----          | -----------                      |
| [`hardening`] | Provides basic hardening options |
| [`ports`]     | Installs the FreeBSD ports tree  |

### Handling `.iso` and `.box` files

Packer will automatically download the `.iso` image if it does not find
the right one under the `iso` directory.  Optionally, you can download
the `.iso` image and save it to the `iso` directory.

`.box` files will be created under the `builds` directory.

[official FreeBSD]: https://app.vagrantup.com/freebsd
[Release Branches]: https://www.freebsd.org/doc/en/books/dev-model/release-branches.html
[Packer]: https://www.packer.io/docs/installation.html
[Vagrant]: https://www.vagrantup.com/downloads.html
[VirtualBox]: https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads
[VMWare Fusion]: http://www.vmware.com/products/fusion/
[`ansible`]: https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD/blob/main/scripts/ansible.sh
[`cleanup`]: https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD/blob/main/scripts/cleanup.sh
[`hardening`]: https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD/blob/main/scripts/hardening.sh
[`ports`]: https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD/blob/main/scripts/ports.sh
[`update`]: https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD/blob/main/scripts/update.sh
[`vagrant`]: https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD/blob/main/scripts/vagrant.sh
[`vmtools`]: https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD/blob/main/scripts/vmtools.sh
[`zeroconf`]: https://github.com/jlduran/packer-FreeBSD/blob/main/scripts/zeroconf.sh
